---
title: "What's happening with the internet's pipelines?"
date: 2024-10-24
---

Some time ago, I wrote about how big tech companies may be 'capturing' the infrastructure of the internet, from data centers to CDN providers to underwater sea cables. The idea is quite simple, that there may be adverse impacts on how the internet is run if these companies disproportionately control the infrastructure that makes it up. 

I ran a basic search on Google and Perplexity to see if there's any been more recent research about this, but was disappointed. I'm particularly interested in seeing reflections on Starlink included in these conversations, but I think Low Earth Orbit (LEO) satellites are still a ways away from becoming a competitors for the more established mode of data transportation. We are already seeing the geopolitical implications to have Starlink being able to dictate how and where internet connectivity is supplied to countries. 

I feel like this debate was starting to bubble up back in 2022 but I haven't seen too much about it since. There is [this report] (https://ad-aspi.s3.ap-southeast-2.amazonaws.com/2024-09/Connecting%20the%20Indo-Pacific%20-%20The%20future%20of%20subsea%20cables%20and%20opportunities%20for%20Australia_0.pdf?VersionId=.LcTT0ZYi0Nab6DeTCLgQ8M1a15m42nD) from the Australian government from September 2024, which highlights many of the issues I brought up in the original blog post. Some of these include potential data security implications and other ways in which 'hyperscalers' may use their control of information to skew markets through potential self preference of bandwidth traffic. 

The report from the previous paragraph highlights that there is now a 71% ownership / leasing of submarine cables by hyperscalers. I feel like a lot of the speculation around potential downsides of this trend depend on the business model for the use of their cables by these companies. I'm not still sure, for example, if they lease out bandwidth in these cables to other companies, and to what extent. I'm also not sure if there are implications of these companies being primarily US based and whether we're seeing their actions reflect US geopolitical interests. If this is the case, I haven't yet found the evidence for it, but want to try and explore this a little more. Hoping I can find more academic analysis of the trend and implications. 

There is this [Atlantic Council Report] (https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/09/Cyber-defense-across-the-ocean-floor-The-geopolitics-of-submarine-cable-security.pdf), which looks at potential security implications, but honestly strikes me more as some US anti-communist fluff piece rather than an honestl analysis of the issue. I enjoyed [this piece] (https://trendsresearch.org/insight/undersea-cables-in-an-age-of-geopolitical-competition/) a little bit more, which despite focusing on 'security' considers a number of other factors and statistics that are interesting. The author, for example, considers that the US government may be actively pushing big tech companies to not work the Chinese government. 

> But big American companies like Meta (formerly Facebook) departed from the project due to increasingly strident warnings from the US government over concerns that Chinese state-owned companies involved in the project may be asked to steal sensitive data transmitted via the cables.[21]

On the business model front, it seems that big-tech companies like the 'condominum' model of ownership; in which "a developer sells capacity ownership to individual operators within the same cable and retains responsibility for the maintenance of the cable." Having spend some time pouring over [this rather dense read on different business models in submarine cables] (https://subtelforum.com/stf-mag-feature-the-business-and-finance-model-for-new-submarine-cable-networks/), however, I'm not able to make any strong deductions about how this might enable increasing hyperscaler or big-tech control on this 'critical infrastructure'. 

After my reading today, I'm not quite sure if my position on this has chaned much. There are still obviously implications of the trend, but I feel like they will likely only really show themselves during a time of heightened geopolitical tension. I do not think it is out of the realm of possibility to consider that we see the US government pushing their tech companies to restrict internet access to countries that do not align with their perspectives and positions. Ofcourse, it may also impact *where* these cables are landing at all. There have been some interesting conversations around how the Chinese government has been using strategic invesments into infratstructure in Africa under terms that favor China in the long term. We might also see similar investments in the area of internet submarine cables, which may have adverse impacts on African countries and their people. 

And with that, I think I can close this chapter for a bit. It might be interesting to consider a powerful visualization of hyperscaler ownership of cables, but maybe another day. 



